Digital border walls and facial recognition aren't just American issues, they're already
active across Canada.
Police are using big data to shift from reacting to crimes to predicting them.
But this triggers a fatal flaw, algorithmic bias.
Take the Saskatchewan Police Predictive Analytics Lab, which is developing algorithms to forecast
repeat offenders.
To learn what a high-risk offender looks like, the algorithm trains on massive datasets
of historical Canadian arrest records.
But independent legal reviews reveal this data isn't a neutral map of crime, it's a map
of past police behavior, skewed by a legacy of systemic racism and over-policing.
Lacking social context, the algorithm blindly accepts these records as ground truth.
It mathematically links marginalized identities to higher crime rates, outputting a high-risk
score.
Officers are deployed based on these objective scores, leading to new arrests in those exact
same communities.
These new arrests feed directly back into the database, confirming the prediction and creating
a self-fulfilling feedback loop.
Experts warn this mechanism likely violates the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
disguising adverse impact discrimination as neutral science.
So what about that Saskatchewan Risk Forecasting Lab?
Unless it rejects this flawed historical data, it won't predict a new future.
It will just mathematically enforce the past.